## The Homogeneous Coordinate System

The homogeneous coordinate system consists of a Euclidean coordinate system of dimension **n** with an additional dimension used to represent points that are infinitely far away, resulting in **n+1** dimensions. The n+1 dimension has the restriction that it must always be 1, causing all vectors in the homogenous space to lie on a hyperplane often called the **projective plane**. The main feature of this coordinate system is that all vectors that lie on an arbitrary line through the origin represent the same point on the projective plane. The points that are infinitely far away are represented in this system with a zero in the n+1 dimensional component, which can be thought of as the hyperplane that is orthogonal to the other dimensional axes, and thus lines through it never intersect with the projective plane.

#### Relation to Translation in Computer Graphics
It is impossible to represent translations in 3 dimensional Euclidean space with 3x3 matrices. In general, a linear transformation is one where the origin remain unchanged. The additional dimension in the homogeneous coordinate system enables translation in three dimensions to be achieved with a matrix multiplication. This translation can be thought of as a transformation that slides geometry around on the projective plane, which is equivalent to a 4 dimensional shear operation. The takeaway from this is that linear transformations in higher dimensional space may appear to have non-linear effects when projected onto a lower dimensional space.

#### Relation to the Perspective Transform in Computer Graphics
Like translation, a perspective transform is not linear in nature, and thus cannot be achieved with a 3-dimensional matrix transformation. The way perspective is achieved in three dimensions uses the concept of similar triangles to calculate the position of geometry on a plane that intersects the line formed between a perspective point and a point in 3-dimensional space. This is achieved by dividing the point by its z-component relative to the perspective point, assuming the image plane is a distance of one away from the perspective point. Mathematically, this results in the point (x,y,z) being mapped to (x/z, y/z, 1). We know that in the homogenous coordinate system, that all points that lie on a line passing through the origin represent the same point on the projective plane, meaning a four dimensional vector is always normalized by its w component. Knowing this, we can create a matrix multiplication that copies the z component into the w component, and then when the vector is homogenized, it will automatically achieve the desired effect. This homogenization effect is automatically performed by the GPU, and all that is required is that we copy the z component into the w component.

#### Meaning of the Homogeneous Infinite Points in Computer Graphics
The special homogeneous vectors where the w component is zero has an important effect in computer graphics. Vectors such as these can be thought of as points on the projective plane that are infinitely far away from the origin. These points can be used to represent points that are invariant to translation. This is necessary to represent vertex attributes such as vertex normals, where the orientation should change with the orientation of the geometry, but as pure directions, do not have a meaningful position in space. In summary, the w component of homogeneous 3d vectors should be 1 if its position relative to the scene has meaning, and 0 if it does not.